README.md, before:

# PEE #

## Building ##

### Grammar assembling ###

~~~~~~~~
   cd build/
   cmake .. -DGRAMMAR=<path to the actual grammar> [-DLABEL=<label>] [-DPoco_DIR=<poco dir>] [-DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=<build type>] [-DEF=<error function>]
~~~~~~~~

For instance:

~~~~~~~~
   cd build/
   cmake .. -DGRAMMAR=../problem/random/grammar.bnf -DLABEL=random -DPoco_DIR=/opt/poco -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=RELEASE
~~~~~~~~

The `EF` definition is the formula used to compute the "distance" of a predicted value (`X`) to the corresponding observed value (`Y`). By default it is set as `fabs((X)-(Y))`, that is, simply the absolute error. Other useful formulas are `-DEF='((X)!=(Y))'`, for classification problems, and `-DEF='(((X)-(Y))*((X)-(Y)))'`, for obtaining the squared error.

### Compilation ###

~~~~~~~~
   make
~~~~~~~~

## Running (example) ##

### Manually (one instance) ###

~~~~~~~~
   ./main  -v -e -acc -strategy PP -d ../problem/iris/data.csv -ncol 5 -port 9080 -cl-d 0 -cl-p 0 -ps 30000 -cp 0.6 -mr 0.01 -ts 5 -nb 2000  -g 1000000 -cl-mls 16 -machine | grep -a '^> [0-9]' | cut -c3- | while read CANDIDATE; do ../script/pareto.py -p pareto.front -dup "$CANDIDATE"; done
~~~~~~~~

The `-dup` option allows duplicate candidates (w.r.t. complexity and error) into the Pareto file, provided that they differ in terms of the symbolic solution (model). Since the actual models differ, strictly speaking one doesn't dominate the other, thus using `-dup` option doesn't violate the principle of non-dominance.

### Through run.py ###

Within `build/`:

~~~~~~~~
   while true; do ../script/run.py -d ../problem/random/data.csv -e ./main -i islands.txt -p 9080 -n 4 -st 5000000 -cl-p 0 -cl-d 0 | grep -a '^> [0-9]' | cut -c3- | while read CANDIDATE; do ../script/pareto.py -p pareto.front -dup "$CANDIDATE"; done; sleep 1; done
~~~~~~~~

This will generate the Pareto front in file 'pareto.front'. Note that you have to run each instance separately (each one having its own port number (`-p <n>`) and ideally on a different accelerator (`-cl-p <p>`, `-cl-d <d>`); for example, you could start each instance on a separate 'screen' tab.

It is possible to pass parameters directly to the PEE's process; in order to do that, use the following convention:

~~~~~~~~
   ... ../script/run.py ... -- <parameters to be passed directly to PEE>
~~~~~~~~

For instance:

~~~~~~~~
   ... ../script/run.py ... -- -min -5.0 -max 5.0
~~~~~~~~

### Using the Pareto front as a repository ###

In this mode, the solutions contained in the Pareto file (actually, their genomes) are reintroduced into new running instances, aiming at the injection of diversity into those instances and, ultimately, improving the Pareto front. The script named `seeder.py` serves this purpose; for example:

~~~~~~~~
   while true; do ../script/seeder.py -i pareto.front -p 9080 -p 9081 -p 9082 -p 9083 -p 9084 -p 9085; sleep 10; done
~~~~~~~~

will periodically (each 10s) send a random genome from the pareto.front file ("Hall of Fame") to each one of the given running instances (`localhost:9080`, ...).


### Watching the Pareto front progress on-the-fly ###

~~~~~~~~
   watch -n 1 "cut -d';' -f2-4 pareto.front|sort -n"
~~~~~~~~

### Putting it all together through 'screen' (AKA doing all above within GNU screen) ###

~~~~~~~~
   # Create the screen session named 'pee'
   screen -S pee -A -d -m

   # Create all necessary windows (tabs)
   screen -S pee -X screen -t island-9080
   screen -S pee -X screen -t island-9081
   screen -S pee -X screen -t island-9082
   screen -S pee -X screen -t island-9083
   screen -S pee -X screen -t island-9084
   screen -S pee -X screen -t island-9085

   screen -S pee -X screen -t seeder
   screen -S pee -X screen -t pareto

   # Run each island on a different window
   screen -S pee -p island-9080 -X stuff $'while true; do ../script/run.py -d ../problem/iris/data.csv -e ./iris -i islands.txt -p 9080 -n 1 -st 1000000 -cl-p 0 -cl-d 0 | grep -a \'^> [0-9]\' | cut -c3- | while read CANDIDATE; do ../script/pareto.py -p iris-pareto.front -dup "$CANDIDATE"; done; sleep 1; done\n'
   screen -S pee -p island-9081 -X stuff $'while true; do ../script/run.py -d ../problem/iris/data.csv -e ./iris -i islands.txt -p 9081 -n 1 -st 2000000 -cl-p 0 -cl-d 0 | grep -a \'^> [0-9]\' | cut -c3- | while read CANDIDATE; do ../script/pareto.py -p iris-pareto.front -dup "$CANDIDATE"; done; sleep 1; done\n'
   screen -S pee -p island-9082 -X stuff $'while true; do ../script/run.py -d ../problem/iris/data.csv -e ./iris -i islands.txt -p 9082 -n 1 -st 3000000 -cl-p 0 -cl-d 1 | grep -a \'^> [0-9]\' | cut -c3- | while read CANDIDATE; do ../script/pareto.py -p iris-pareto.front -dup "$CANDIDATE"; done; sleep 1; done\n'
   screen -S pee -p island-9083 -X stuff $'while true; do ../script/run.py -d ../problem/iris/data.csv -e ./iris -i islands.txt -p 9083 -n 1 -st 4000000 -cl-p 0 -cl-d 1 | grep -a \'^> [0-9]\' | cut -c3- | while read CANDIDATE; do ../script/pareto.py -p iris-pareto.front -dup "$CANDIDATE"; done; sleep 1; done\n'
   screen -S pee -p island-9084 -X stuff $'while true; do ../script/run.py -d ../problem/iris/data.csv -e ./iris -i islands.txt -p 9084 -n 1 -st 5000000 -cl-p 0 -cl-d 2 | grep -a \'^> [0-9]\' | cut -c3- | while read CANDIDATE; do ../script/pareto.py -p iris-pareto.front -dup "$CANDIDATE"; done; sleep 1; done\n'
   screen -S pee -p island-9085 -X stuff $'while true; do ../script/run.py -d ../problem/iris/data.csv -e ./iris -i islands.txt -p 9085 -n 1 -st 6000000 -cl-p 0 -cl-d 2 | grep -a \'^> [0-9]\' | cut -c3- | while read CANDIDATE; do ../script/pareto.py -p iris-pareto.front -dup "$CANDIDATE"; done; sleep 1; done\n'

   # Runs the seeder (feedback) and visualize the Pareto front
   screen -S pee -p seeder -X stuff $'while true; do ../script/seeder.py -i iris-pareto.front -p 9080 -p 9081 -p 9082 -p 9083 -p 9084 -p 9085; sleep 5; done\n'
   screen -S pee -p pareto -X stuff $'watch -n 1 "cut -d\';\' -f2-4 iris-pareto.front|cut -c1-140|sort -n|tail -n 35"\n'
~~~~~~~~

## Running Prediction (example) ##

The prediction mode outputs a prediction for each instance of the dataset (`-d`) with respect to the solution given by its phenotype (`-sol`). This mode does not assume that the dataset has the dependent variable (observation). It can process the instances sequentially; e.g.:

~~~~~~~~
   ./main -d ../problem/vento/speed_A305_1.tes -ncol 36 -sol '6 10015 10064 5.000000000000 10035 10015 10064 3.000000000000 10062' -pred
~~~~~~~~

or in parallel if one adds the `-acc` flag and the corresponding strategy (`-strategy`):

~~~~~~~~
   ./main -acc -strategy PP -d ../problem/vento/speed_A305_1.tes -ncol 36 -sol '6 10015 10064 5.000000000000 10035 10015 10064 3.000000000000 10062' -pred
~~~~~~~~

## Running Testing Solution (example) ##

In this mode, only the MAE is output. Similarly, it can run sequentially or in parallel:

~~~~~~~~
   ./main -d ../problem/vento/speed_A305_1.tes -ncol 36 -sol '6 10015 10064 5.000000000000 10035 10015 10064 3.000000000000 10062'
~~~~~~~~

Since it computes the error, the dependent variable (observation) is required as the last field of the dataset.

Commit message:

Enables the reduction by maximum error in the PPCU strategy.

README.md, after:

# PEE #

## Building ##

### Grammar assembling ###

~~~~~~~~
   cd build/
   cmake .. -DGRAMMAR=<path to the actual grammar> [-DLABEL=<label>] [-DPoco_DIR=<poco dir>] [-DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=<build type>] [-DEF=<error function>]
~~~~~~~~

For instance:

~~~~~~~~
   cd build/
   cmake .. -DGRAMMAR=../problem/random/grammar.bnf -DLABEL=random -DPoco_DIR=/opt/poco -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=RELEASE
~~~~~~~~

The `EF` definition is the formula used to compute the "distance" of a predicted value (`X`) to the corresponding observed value (`Y`). By default it is set as `fabs((X)-(Y))`, that is, simply the absolute error. Other useful formulas are `-DEF='((X)!=(Y))'`, for classification problems, and `-DEF='(((X)-(Y))*((X)-(Y)))'`, for obtaining the squared error.

In the PPCU strategy, one can also choose between the sum of the errors (the default) or the maximum error. To enable the latter, just add to cmake the option `-DREDUCEMAX=BOOL:ON`

### Compilation ###

~~~~~~~~
   make
~~~~~~~~

## Running (example) ##

### Manually (one instance) ###

~~~~~~~~
   ./main  -v -e -acc -strategy PP -d ../problem/iris/data.csv -ncol 5 -port 9080 -cl-d 0 -cl-p 0 -ps 30000 -cp 0.6 -mr 0.01 -ts 5 -nb 2000  -g 1000000 -cl-mls 16 -machine | grep -a '^> [0-9]' | cut -c3- | while read CANDIDATE; do ../script/pareto.py -p pareto.front -dup "$CANDIDATE"; done
~~~~~~~~

The `-dup` option allows duplicate candidates (w.r.t. complexity and error) into the Pareto file, provided that they differ in terms of the symbolic solution (model). Since the actual models differ, strictly speaking one doesn't dominate the other, thus using `-dup` option doesn't violate the principle of non-dominance.

### Through run.py ###

Within `build/`:

~~~~~~~~
   while true; do ../script/run.py -d ../problem/random/data.csv -e ./main -i islands.txt -p 9080 -n 4 -st 5000000 -cl-p 0 -cl-d 0 | grep -a '^> [0-9]' | cut -c3- | while read CANDIDATE; do ../script/pareto.py -p pareto.front -dup "$CANDIDATE"; done; sleep 1; done
~~~~~~~~

This will generate the Pareto front in file 'pareto.front'. Note that you have to run each instance separately (each one having its own port number (`-p <n>`) and ideally on a different accelerator (`-cl-p <p>`, `-cl-d <d>`); for example, you could start each instance on a separate 'screen' tab.

It is possible to pass parameters directly to the PEE's process; in order to do that, use the following convention:

~~~~~~~~
   ... ../script/run.py ... -- <parameters to be passed directly to PEE>
~~~~~~~~

For instance:

~~~~~~~~
   ... ../script/run.py ... -- -min -5.0 -max 5.0
~~~~~~~~

### Using the Pareto front as a repository ###

In this mode, the solutions contained in the Pareto file (actually, their genomes) are reintroduced into new running instances, aiming at the injection of diversity into those instances and, ultimately, improving the Pareto front. The script named `seeder.py` serves this purpose; for example:

~~~~~~~~
   while true; do ../script/seeder.py -i pareto.front -p 9080 -p 9081 -p 9082 -p 9083 -p 9084 -p 9085; sleep 10; done
~~~~~~~~

will periodically (each 10s) send a random genome from the pareto.front file ("Hall of Fame") to each one of the given running instances (`localhost:9080`, ...).


### Watching the Pareto front progress on-the-fly ###

~~~~~~~~
   watch -n 1 "cut -d';' -f2-4 pareto.front|sort -n"
~~~~~~~~

### Putting it all together through 'screen' (AKA doing all above within GNU screen) ###

~~~~~~~~
   # Create the screen session named 'pee'
   screen -S pee -A -d -m

   # Create all necessary windows (tabs)
   screen -S pee -X screen -t island-9080
   screen -S pee -X screen -t island-9081
   screen -S pee -X screen -t island-9082
   screen -S pee -X screen -t island-9083
   screen -S pee -X screen -t island-9084
   screen -S pee -X screen -t island-9085

   screen -S pee -X screen -t seeder
   screen -S pee -X screen -t pareto

   # Run each island on a different window
   screen -S pee -p island-9080 -X stuff $'while true; do ../script/run.py -d ../problem/iris/data.csv -e ./iris -i islands.txt -p 9080 -n 1 -st 1000000 -cl-p 0 -cl-d 0 | grep -a \'^> [0-9]\' | cut -c3- | while read CANDIDATE; do ../script/pareto.py -p iris-pareto.front -dup "$CANDIDATE"; done; sleep 1; done\n'
   screen -S pee -p island-9081 -X stuff $'while true; do ../script/run.py -d ../problem/iris/data.csv -e ./iris -i islands.txt -p 9081 -n 1 -st 2000000 -cl-p 0 -cl-d 0 | grep -a \'^> [0-9]\' | cut -c3- | while read CANDIDATE; do ../script/pareto.py -p iris-pareto.front -dup "$CANDIDATE"; done; sleep 1; done\n'
   screen -S pee -p island-9082 -X stuff $'while true; do ../script/run.py -d ../problem/iris/data.csv -e ./iris -i islands.txt -p 9082 -n 1 -st 3000000 -cl-p 0 -cl-d 1 | grep -a \'^> [0-9]\' | cut -c3- | while read CANDIDATE; do ../script/pareto.py -p iris-pareto.front -dup "$CANDIDATE"; done; sleep 1; done\n'
   screen -S pee -p island-9083 -X stuff $'while true; do ../script/run.py -d ../problem/iris/data.csv -e ./iris -i islands.txt -p 9083 -n 1 -st 4000000 -cl-p 0 -cl-d 1 | grep -a \'^> [0-9]\' | cut -c3- | while read CANDIDATE; do ../script/pareto.py -p iris-pareto.front -dup "$CANDIDATE"; done; sleep 1; done\n'
   screen -S pee -p island-9084 -X stuff $'while true; do ../script/run.py -d ../problem/iris/data.csv -e ./iris -i islands.txt -p 9084 -n 1 -st 5000000 -cl-p 0 -cl-d 2 | grep -a \'^> [0-9]\' | cut -c3- | while read CANDIDATE; do ../script/pareto.py -p iris-pareto.front -dup "$CANDIDATE"; done; sleep 1; done\n'
   screen -S pee -p island-9085 -X stuff $'while true; do ../script/run.py -d ../problem/iris/data.csv -e ./iris -i islands.txt -p 9085 -n 1 -st 6000000 -cl-p 0 -cl-d 2 | grep -a \'^> [0-9]\' | cut -c3- | while read CANDIDATE; do ../script/pareto.py -p iris-pareto.front -dup "$CANDIDATE"; done; sleep 1; done\n'

   # Runs the seeder (feedback) and visualize the Pareto front
   screen -S pee -p seeder -X stuff $'while true; do ../script/seeder.py -i iris-pareto.front -p 9080 -p 9081 -p 9082 -p 9083 -p 9084 -p 9085; sleep 5; done\n'
   screen -S pee -p pareto -X stuff $'watch -n 1 "cut -d\';\' -f2-4 iris-pareto.front|cut -c1-140|sort -n|tail -n 35"\n'
~~~~~~~~

## Running Prediction (example) ##

The prediction mode outputs a prediction for each instance of the dataset (`-d`) with respect to the solution given by its phenotype (`-sol`). This mode does not assume that the dataset has the dependent variable (observation). It can process the instances sequentially; e.g.:

~~~~~~~~
   ./main -d ../problem/vento/speed_A305_1.tes -ncol 36 -sol '6 10015 10064 5.000000000000 10035 10015 10064 3.000000000000 10062' -pred
~~~~~~~~

or in parallel if one adds the `-acc` flag and the corresponding strategy (`-strategy`):

~~~~~~~~
   ./main -acc -strategy PP -d ../problem/vento/speed_A305_1.tes -ncol 36 -sol '6 10015 10064 5.000000000000 10035 10015 10064 3.000000000000 10062' -pred
~~~~~~~~

## Running Testing Solution (example) ##

In this mode, only the MAE is output. Similarly, it can run sequentially or in parallel:

~~~~~~~~
   ./main -d ../problem/vento/speed_A305_1.tes -ncol 36 -sol '6 10015 10064 5.000000000000 10035 10015 10064 3.000000000000 10062'
~~~~~~~~

Since it computes the error, the dependent variable (observation) is required as the last field of the dataset.
